# Modelling Amazon fire regimes under climate change scenarios

Leonardo A. Saravia ^1^ ^4^, Ben Bond-Lamberty ^2^, Samir Suweis ^3^

1. Centro Austral de Investigaciones Científicas (CADIC-CONICET), Ushuaia, Argentina.

2. Pacific Northwest National Laboratory, Joint Global Change Research Institute, 5825 University Research Court #3500, College Park, MD 20740, USA 

3. Laboratory of Interdisciplinary Physics, Department of Physics and Astronomy "G. Galilei", University of Padova, Padova, Italy

4. Corresponding author e-mail lasaravia@untdf.edu.ar, ORCID https://orcid.org/0000-0002-7911-4398


\newpage


## Abstract 

Fire is one of the most important disturbances of the earth-system, shaping the biodiversity of ecosystems and particularly forests. Climatic change and other anthropogenic drivers such as deforestation, land use change, could produce potentially abrupt changes in fire regimes, triggering more profound transformations like the transition from forests to savannah or grasslands ecosystems. Large biodiversity loss could be produced if these transitions occur. Climate change could enhance fire ignition and spread, potentially producing more extensive, intense, and frequent fires. In this work, we use a simple forest-fire model and analyze the possible changes in the Amazon region's fire regime that depend on climate change-related variables. We explored the model behavior and find that there are two possible regime changes: a critical regime that implies high variability in fire extension and mega-fires, and an absorbing phase transition which would produce the extinction of the forest and transition to a different vegetation state. We parameterize the model using remote sensing data on fire extension and temperature. As an initial outcome, the model demonstrates proficiency in predicting past fires. Upon considering 21st-century climate projections, our findings suggest that the Amazon region is not currently nearing any of these regime changes but does predict a consistent increase in fire extension. Nevertheless, this anticipated increment, in conjunction with unaccounted factors such as deforestation, poses the potential for drastic alterations.


## Introduction

Very few regions in the terrestrial biosphere are unaffected by fire. Fires caused directly or indirectly by human activities [@Bowman2020] have different characteristics from natural fires, including in spatial pattern, severity, burn frequency and seasonality, producing contrasting ecological consequences [@Steel2021]. Recent years have seen an increase in fire intensity and extension in different regions [@Pivello2021;@Bowman2020], partially attributable to the fact we are experiencing a biosphere temperature that is 1&deg;C above historical records [@Masson-Delmotte2021]; also, it is hypothesized that this intensification could reduce the spatial and temporal variation in fire regimes, called pyrodiversity [@Kelly2017], that in turn will generate substantial reductions in biodiversity and ecosystem processes such as carbon storage [@Dieleman2020;@Furlaud2021]. It is likely that the most affected regions will be the ones in which fire has been historically rare or absent. In regions such as tropical forests [@Barlow2020], extreme fires could trigger extensive biodiversity loss as well as major ecosystems changes as transitions from forest to savannah or shrublands [@Hirota2011; @Fairman2015]. 

Fires in the Amazon region were historically rare, due to the ability of old-growth forest to maintain enough moisture to prevent fire spread, even after prolonged drought periods [@Uhl1990]. Human activities such as deforestation and land-use change over the past 40 years have produced the conditions for fire to become much more frequent and widespread across the basin [@Alencar2011; @Aragao2018; @Cardil2020]. Droughts are predicted to increase due to climatic change, and have the potential to interact with human activities such as secondary vegetation slash-and-burn and cyclical ﬁre-based pasture cleaning [@Aragao2018]. Although deforestation rates were substantially reduced until 2018 [@Feng2021], previous deforestation activities may provide sufficient ignition sources for fire to expand into adjacent forests [@Aragao2018]. This process could increase the importance of fires unrelated to deforestation [@Aragao2014].

Different models of fire for the Amazon have been developed to predict regime changes under climate change scenarios. Here, we define a regime change as an abrupt transition in fire patterns across large areas, such as a shift from infrequent scattered fires to more frequent and extensive burning [@Kelly2020]. These models can be process-based [@LePage2017] or statistical [@Fonseca2019], and generally consider land-use change and other human activities, as well as local weather conditions, but they usually neglect the spatial dynamics of fire spread. Statistical fire models take into account mainly environmental factors [@Turco2018], while process oriented models include more mechanistic details [@Thonicke2010], and a few treat spatial dynamical phenomena [@Schertzer2014]. Such spatial dynamics are important because they can provide insights into how local interactions give rise to emergent fire patterns [@Pueyo2010], and potentially change the stability characteristics of the entire dynamical system [@Levin1996].

Simple models of fire have been used as an example of self-organized criticality (SOC), where systems can self-organize into a state characterized by power-laws in different model outputs. For example, the forest fire model of Drossel & Schwabl @Drossel1992 (DSM) was proposed to show SOC in relation to the size distribution of disturbance events [@Jensen1998]. Power-laws imply scale invariance, meaning that there is no characteristic scale in the model. Later it was shown that DSM does not exhibit true scale invariance [@Grassberger2002] and that the system needs to be somewhat tuned to observe criticality [@Bonachela2009]. These facts diminished its theoretical attractiveness, but the model could be still of high practical relevance. Some modifications of the Drossell & Schwabl (DSM) model have been used to predict fire responses to climate change [@Pueyo2007a], and other DSM variants can reproduce features observed in empirical studies [@Ratz1995] such as the power-law distributions of the fire sizes, the size and shape of unburned areas and the relationship between annual burned area and diversity of ecological stages [@Zinck2009]. An analysis of different models showed that the key for reproducing all these patterns was changing the scale of grid cells to represent several hectares, and the ‘memory effect’: flammability increases with the time since the last fire at a given site [@Zinck2009; @Zinck2011]. But the exponent of the fire size distribution observed in different ecoregions still cannot be reproduced by these models. 

These simple models could have critical behaviour characterized by power-law distribution in fire sizes and other model outputs. Such dynamics can be explained in terms of percolation theory [@Stauffer1994] where there is a transition between two states: one where propagation of fires occurs, and another where it is very limited. The narrow region where the transition occurs is the critical point, characterized by an order parameter (fire size) that depends on some external control parameter (e.g. ignition probability) [@Sole2006]. An example of this transition could be the case of the recent Australia 2019-2020 mega-fires [@Nolan2020], which had devastating consequences for biodiversity and ecosystem functioning [@Kelly2020]. Historically, indigenous fire stewardship in Australian landscapes maintained flammable forest in a disconnected state by producing frequent small scale fires [@NatureEcoEvo2020], thereby preventing high intensity fires and protecting biodiversity. This regime was disrupted by fire suppression related to European colonization land-use change [@Hoffman2021] and climate [@Adams2020], pushing the system towards a critical regime [@Nicoletti2023] with less ecosystem resilience to extreme fires. These kinds of extreme events are very difficult to predict by Earth system models that do not fully incorporate the dynamic of fuel accumulation and vegetation dynamics or their effects on biodiversity and ecosystem services [@Sanderson2020].

The objective of this work is to model and predict the changes in fire regimes of the Amazon region using a simple spatial stochastic fire model, based on variables like precipitation and temperature that are included in climate change scenarios. By doing this we are assuming that the emergent dynamics can be described by a process of slow accumulation of fuel and rapid discharge produced by the fires. We first analyse the fire dynamics of the last 20 years in the region with the MODIS burnt area product to check our main assumption and derive an ignition probability. Then we predict the ignition probability up to the year 2060 based on different greenhouse gas Representative Concentration Pathways. Finally, using the model forced with the ignition probability, we predict and analyse the possible changes in the modelled fire regimes for the Amazon. 


## Methods 

Our region of study is the Amazon biome (Figure S1). This includes Brazil, which represents 60% of the area, as well as eight other countries (Bolivia, Colombia, Ecuador, Guyana, Peru, Suriname, Venezuela, and French Guiana). We chose this region because a significant amount of fires extend to tropical moist forest outside Brazil [@Cardil2020], and the whole area is thought to be a crucial tipping element of the Earth-system [@Lenton2013;@Staver2011]. 

### Fire data and parameters

We estimated the monthly burned areas from 2001 to the end of 2021 using the NASA Moderate-Resolution Imaging Spectroradiometer (MODIS) burnt area Collection 6 product MCD64A1 [@Giglio2016], which has a 460 m pixel resolution. We used Google Earth Engine with the JavaScript programming language to download the data restricted to the region of interest (See source code availability below). Each image represents the burned pixels as 1 and the non-burned as 0. We then calculated the burned clusters using 4 nearest neighbours (Von Neumann neighbourhood) and the Hoshen–Kopelman algorithm [@Hoshen1976]. Each cluster contains contiguous pixels burned within a month and this represents a fire event $S$, allowing us to calculate the number and sizes of fire clusters by month. We estimated the probability of ignition $f$ as $f(t) = \frac{|S_t|}{T}$, where $|\ |$ denotes the number of clusters, $S_t$ that start in the month $t$ (if a fire started in the previous month we avoided it to remove possible double counting), and $T$ is total number of pixels in the region, to allow comparisons with the fire model. 

We also estimated the distribution of fire sizes using an annual period to have enough fire clusters to discriminate between different distributions. We aggregated the monthly images using a simple superposition; the annual image has a 1 if it has one or more fires during the year, and 0 if it has none. This assumes that most of the sites only burn once a year, we verified this using the MODIS data that on average only 0.06% burn more than once annually. After that, we ran again the Hoshen–Kopelman algorithm to obtain the annual fire clusters. Then we fitted the following distributions to the fire sizes: power-law, power-law with exponential cut-off, log-normal, and exponential. We used maximum likelihood to decide which distribution fit the data best using the Akaike Information Criteria ($AIC$) [@Clauset2009]. Additionally, we computed a likelihood ratio test, Voung's test [@Vuong1989], for non-nested models. We only considered it a true power-law when the value of the $AIC$ was at a minimum and the comparison with the exponential distribution using the Vuong's test was significant with p<0.05; if p>=0.05 we assumed that the two distributions cannot be differentiated. 

### Modelling the probability of ignition

We calculated the monthly ignition probability $f$ and related it to monthly precipitation ($ppt$), maximum temperature ($T_{max}$) and a seasonal term ($m$). These variables have generally been included in global and regional fire activity models [@Fonseca2019;@Turco2018;@Huang2015;@Wei2020]. More variables were used in these models, but we are constrained by the variables available in the Climate Projections (see below). We obtained environmental data from the TerraClimate dataset [@Abatzoglou2018], doing an average over the region of study, aiming to represent the influence of regional climate over $f$. We evaluated an increasingly complex series of generalized additive models (GAMs), assuming a Gaussian distribution and transformed $f$ to logarithms, because it had a highly skewed distribution. Additionally we fitted the same models assuming a Gamma distribution and no transformation for $f$. For all the models we used thin plate regression splines [@Pedersen2019] as smoothing terms, and for interactions between environmental variables we used tensor products, using restricted maximum likelihood (REML) to ﬁt to the data [@Pedersen2019]. All these procedures were available in the R package **mgcv** [@Wood2017] and all source code is available at the repository <https://github.com/lsaravia/AmazonFireTippingPoints>.

We selected the best models using $AIC$ [@Wood2017]. To evaluate the predictive power of the models, we broke the data set into a training set representing 85% of the data and testing set (always 3 years long) and we repeated the procedure 10 times starting at different random dates. We then calculated the mean absolute error (MAE) and the Root Mean Squared Error (RMSE) for the three best models selected with $AIC$ (Table S2).  The formulas of the MAE and RMSE are as follows:

MAE = $\frac{1}{n} \sum_{i=1}^n |f_i - \hat{f_i}|$

RMSE = $\sqrt{\frac{1}{n} \sum_{i=1}^n (f_i - \hat{f_i})^2}$

Where $f_i$ is the observed ignition probability $f$ at month $i$, $\hat{f_i}$ the predicted $f$ and $n$ the total number of months used for predictions. We used the model with smaller MAE and RMSE to obtain predictions of the ignition probability up to 2060. Driving data were obtained from the NASA Earth Exchange Global Daily Downscaled Climate Projections NEX-GDPP (https://www.nccs.nasa.gov/services/data-collections/land-based-products/nex-gddp)[@Thrasher2012], which were estimated with General Circulation Models (GCM) runs conducted under the Coupled Model Intercomparison Project Phase 5 [@Taylor2012]. We averaged over the 21 CMIP5 models and over the study region to obtain the monthly values of the needed variables: precipitation and maximum temperature. Then we estimated the probability of ignition up to 2060 using the fitted GAM across two of the four Representative Concentration Pathways (RCPs), RCP4.5 and RCP8.5 [@Meinshausen2011]. Such RCPs are greenhouse gas concentration trajectories adopted by the IPCC and used for climate modelling and research [@Moss2010].


### Fire Model

Conceptually the model represents two key biological processes: forest burning and forest recovery. We assume that the forest layer represents the flammable biomass or fuel layer of the forest (rather than absolute forest cover), as the focus is on modeling fire spread dynamics. When a site is burned in the model, it does not necessarily mean all vegetation is killed - rather, it represents the consumption of flammable fuels. The regrowth or recovery process simulates vegetation re-establishing flammable biomass over time. 

The model uses a 2-dimensional lattice to represent the spatial region. Each site in the lattice can be in one of three different states: an empty or burned site, a flammable forest (called forest for short), or a burning forest. The lattice is updated in parallel, according to the following steps: 

1. We pick at random a burning site, and it becomes an empty site in the following step (the model's timestep is one day)

2. We pick at random a forest site and it becomes a burning forest if one or more of its four nearest neighbour sites are burning

3. We pick at random another forest site and it sends (with probability $p$) a propagule to an empty site at a distance drawn from a power-law dispersal kernel with exponent $de$.  

4. A random site can catch fire spontaneously with probability $f$, i.e., this probability changes by month, reflecting the fire season.

We assumed absorbing boundary conditions and a lattice size of 450x450 sites, but also ran simulations with other sizes, resulting in equivalent results. Rule 3 means that a burned or empty site can become forest more quickly when it is near a forest site, but also that some sites can become forest even when far from established forest sites--depending on the kernel exponent, it could be any site in the lattice [@Marco2011]. The choice of a power-law dispersal is justified because forests dispersion generally exhibits fat-tailed kernels [@Clark2005; @Seri2012]. 

This model is very similar to the Drossel-Schwabl (DSM) forest fire model [@Drossel1992]: it exhibits critical behaviour when $\theta = p/f$ tends to $\infty$, and thus must satisfy the condition that $f << p$, as is generally observed in natural systems. The model involves the separation between three time scales: the fast burning of forest clusters, the slow recovery of forest, and the even slower rate of fire ignitions. Then in the critical regime there is a slow accumulation of forest that forms connected clusters, and eventually as the ignition probability is very low these clusters connect the whole lattice--- here is the link with percolation theory [@Stauffer1994]--- and a single ignition event can produce big fires. After this, the density of the forest becomes very low and the accumulation cycle begins again. This regime is characterized by wide fluctuations in the size of fires and the density of trees, with both following approximately power-law size distributions. If the ignition probability $f$ is too high fires are frequent, forest sites become disconnected and small fires, with a characteristic size, dominate the system. 

One of the features not present in the original forest fire model is that forests can have long-distance dispersal, ecologically this determines population spread, the colonization of empty habitats and the assembly of local communities [@Nathan2008]. The inclusion of long distance dispersal can modify the distribution of forest clusters, the distribution of fire sizes, and the dynamics of the model [@Marco2011]. 

When forest dispersal is limited mainly to nearest neighbours, forest recovery produces clusters that tend to coalesce and form uniform clusters with few or no isolated forest sites. When the forest burns, these isolated forest sites are the points from where the forest recovers (assuming no external colonization); when these are not present there is an increased probability that the forest becomes extinct. When dispersal is long-distance there is an important number of isolated forest sites, thus decreasing the probability of forest extinction. All these processes are particularly important when $\theta$ is low and fires are smaller but more frequent. In dynamical terms there is a critical extinction value $\theta_{ext}$, when $\theta < \theta_{ext}$ the forest become extinct, but the critical value depends on the dispersal distance governed by $de$.

The second feature not present in the original forest fire model is seasonality. In natural systems, there is a period of the year when environmental conditions produce an increase in the fire ignition probability, and during the rest of the year there is a much lower probability of fires. This forces a periodic accumulation of forest and a short period of intense fires which is called the fire season. Thus, the model has a short period of low $\theta_{min}$ and a longer period of high $\theta_{max}$. If both the minimum and maximum $\theta$ are in the critical region, the model behaviour, in the long run, will be like the critical regime with maximum fire sizes in the fire season. When $\theta_{max}$ is in the critical and $\theta_{min}$ outside the critical zone, the model's dynamics regime could have more extreme fires (i.e. be more similar to the critical regime) than an equivalent non-seasonal model. If both $\theta$ are outside the critical region the dynamics could be close to the critical extinction zone, but in this case, seasonal differences in fire sizes will be less pronounced. 

Increasing the length of the fire season as predicted in climate change scenarios [@Pausas2021] will produce the model to spend more time at a lower $\theta$ decreasing the connectivity of the forest and the size of fires. Moreover, this could increase the possibility of critical extinction if $\theta_{max} - \theta_{min}$ are below $\theta_{ext}$. In this work we are assuming that the forest is flammable forest; the extinction of this state could mean that environmental conditions become wetter and the forest does not burn anymore. If environmental conditions become dryer the extinction of forest probably means a transition to another type of vegetation and then the conditions to apply this model will no longer hold. 

We made a set of exploratory simulations, with a range of parameters compatible with what we found for the Amazon region, to characterize the previously described regimes (Table S3). Using a lattice size of 450x450 sites, we ran the simulations for 60 years with an initial forest density of 0.3 (we found that different initial conditions gave similar results), and used the final 40 years to estimate the total annual fire size, the maximum cluster fire size, the distribution of fire sizes, and the total number of fires. To determine the cluster fire sizes and distributions we used the same methods described previously for the MODIS fire data. We ran a factorial combination of dispersal exponent $de$ and $\theta$ and 10 repetitions of each parameter set. First, we ran the experiment with $\theta$ fixed, keeping the ignition probability $f$ constant, and then repeated the experiment with seasonality: we simulated a fire season of 3 months each year multiplying $f$ by 10. A dispersal exponent $de>>1$ (e.g. $de=102$) is equivalent to a dispersal to the nearest neighbours, while $de=2.0155$ corresponds to a mean dispersal distance of 66 sites (Table S3), i.e. long range dispersal.

### Fire Model Fitting

As we already estimated the $f$ parameter from the 21 years of MODIS data, we only needed to estimate the dispersal exponent $de$ and the probability $p$ of forest growth. This parameter $p$ is expressed as $r=1/p$, representing the average number of days for forest to recover. For this estimation we duplicated the extension of the estimated $f$ as if it started in 1980; we allowed 20 years for transient effects to dissipate in the model, and then used the last 20 years to compare with monthly fire data. This choice was justified because most human activities in the Amazon started in this decade during the conversion of large areas of forest to agriculture [@Brando2019]. 

To explore the parameter space we used Latin-hypercube sampling [@Fang2005] with parameter ranges $2.5 - 2.00035$ for $de$ (equivalent to a mean dispersal distance range of 3 - 290 sites) and $365 - 7300$ days for $r$. As the model has a long transient period, we could suppose that the system is in a transient state thus we also estimated the initial forest density as a parameter with a range of densities of 0.2 - 0.7.  We used 600 samples and 10 repeated simulations of the model for each sample, totalling 6000 simulations. We select the best parameter set using Approximate Bayesian Computation (ABC) [@Csillery2010; @Csillery2012] comparing the  relative monthly fire size i.e the absolute size divided by the total number of sites (the number of MODIS pixels for the Amazon basin or the number of lattice sites for simulations) with model predictions using euclidean distance. During an initial test, we observed that the peaks in the model were delayed by 2-3 months; the same happens in more realistic process based models [@Thonicke2010], and as we were not interested in predicting the exact seasonal fire patterns, instead of using the complete monthly time series we used the monthly maximum fire size of the year. We validated this choice using a random model simulation with known parameters as data  and verifying that we recover the parameters (see source code). The second step of our fitting procedure was to use power-law fire distribution to perform another ABC; to do this we ran 10 simulations for each of the parameter sets in the posterior distribution and then calculated the fire cluster distributions using the same methods explained previously. We use ABC to select a second posterior parameter distribution compared to the median value of the power-law exponent from MODIS data. The tolerance (proportion of results accepted nearest the target values) for both ABC procedures was set at 0.05. 

Finally, we ran the model with the final posterior parameter distribution, the ignition probability estimated from the MODIS data, and the ignition probability estimated with the GAM model for the period 2000-2020, to check if the data fit with the range of predictions. We performed the ABC using a lattice size of 450x450 sites, and as we used relative values (e.g. absolute fire size divided by the total number of sites) the model does not represent a defined scale. 

### Model Predictions  

We used the posterior parameter distribution set and the predictions of the parameter $f$ under RCP4.5 and RCP8.5 to make simulations up to 2060. We started simulations in the year 1980 as in the fitting procedure, but instead of using $f$ derived directly from data we used the $f$ obtained from the GAM model, allowing us to compare actual and predicted fires using the same method to obtain $f$. 

Besides our model does not include explicitly the effect of deforestation, we can make an approximation variating the parameters in time as deforestation increases. We fitted the parameters of the model to the whole region, assuming one type of flamable forest. But the parameters can be thought as an average of two vegetation types, 1) the vegetation that grows after deforestation that has a higher probability of ignition $f$ and rapid recovery so the growth probability $p$ is also higher 2) the original forest with lower $f$ and also lower $p$. Thus as deforestation increases, we can roughly calculate the increase in the average $p$ and $f$ due to deforestation after the fitted period (check the supplementary material for details). We estimated the mean deforestation rate for the Amazon biome using the Hansen remote sensing product [@Hansen2013], updated until 2021. We applied this to the RCP4.5 scenario, showing the increase in $f$ after 2021 in Figure S23.


Besides our model does not explicitly account for deforestation's impact; however, we approximate this by dynamically adjusting parameters as deforestation intensifies. Initially fitted to the entire region based on a singular flammable forest type assumption, these parameters reflect an average between two vegetation categories: 1) post-deforestation vegetation, featuring higher ignition probability ($f$) and faster recovery (associated with higher growth probability, $p$); and 2) the original forest, with lower $f$ and $p$ values. Consequently, escalating deforestation leads to an estimated rise in the average $p$ and $f$ values beyond the fitted period (refer to supplementary material for more details). Leveraging the Hansen remote sensing product [@Hansen2013] updated until 2021, we calculated the mean deforestation rate for the Amazon biome. Subsequently, under the RCP4.5 scenario, we demonstrate the potential impact of deforestation on the model's predictions. The estimated increase in $f$ post-2021 is shown in Figure S23.

## Results

### Fire patterns from MODIS data

The monthly fires follow a strong seasonal pattern with a maximum between September and October (Figure S2). We characterize the annual fire regime using the total fire size (total burned area) and the maximum fire cluster (the biggest fire event $S_{max}$). We note that the years with highest $S_{max}$ are also years with high total fire size (Figure 1). The years 2007 and 2010 had the two highest $S_{max}$ and they also have a power-law distribution (Table S1, Figures S3-S5). Power-law distributions are defined as $c S^{-\alpha}$ where $c$ is constant, $\alpha$ the exponent and have an extra  parameters: $S=x_{min}$, which is the minimum value for which the power-law holds. The constant $c$ is given by the normalization requirement [@Newman2005].
Only 6 of 20 years exhibit fire sizes following a power law distribution (Table S1), and some of such distributions have a range [$S_{max} - x_{min}$] with the highest values compared to the years without power-laws, but there are also years with power-law and small range. These two extremes represent a pattern that we also observe in the fire model. 

![Annual total fire size vs maximum fire size relative to Amazon basin, estimated with MODIS burned area product. These observed data exhibit cycles of loading and discharge, years with high fire extension and big fire events---the upper right region of the figure---which are followed by years of low fire extension and no extreme events in the lower left region. A typical trajectory could be the years 2009, 2010 and 2011 where this cycle can be clearly observed.](figure/Amazon_Annual_TotSizeVsMaxSize_arrows.jpg)

### Fitting of ignition parameter

We fitted GAM models for the ignition probability $f$ with single variables, combinations of two interacting variables, and one month lags, the best model with lower $AIC$ and lower MAE and RMSE was the Gaussian with the interaction  $T_{max} * m$ (Table S2). For the GAM fitted to the complete dataset we observe that the model does not capture the most extreme years of $f$ (Figure S7), but the model fitted for the first years (< 2018) predicted the rest of the data well (Figure S8).

With the best-fitted GAM and the $T_{max}$ from the NASA Earth Exchange Global Daily Downscaled Climate Projections, we predicted the monthly $f$ starting from 2021 for two greenhouse gas emissions scenarios: RCP4.5 and RCP8.5. For the fire model simulations we added the GAM's predictions using the actual data previous to 2021, we can observe that the temporal pattern of $f$ before 2021 are seasonal but more irregular and variable than the patterns after 2021 (Figures S9 & S10). 

### Fire model exploration 

We ran the model for a range of the $\theta = p/f$ parameter, anticipating that larger values would produce critical behaviour, consisting of large variability of fires between years and extremely large cluster fire sizes that follow a power-law distribution. <!--  This is against reduction of pyrodiversity you mention in the introduction --> As expected, we obtained a larger proportion of power-law distributions for the biggest size of $\theta$ (Table S4 & S5), and particularly high variability and extremely big fires (Figure 2). For simulations with seasonality, we observed the expected decrease on the number of years where fire cluster size follow power law distribution, also less variability and fewer extreme fires, because in these cases $\theta$ decreases for the fire season. Seasonality also had the unexpected effect of increasing the frequency of power-law distribution for $\theta = 25$ with a bigger exponent than the ones for large $\theta$ (Table S5); this pattern was also observed in the MODIS data. 

In the simulations with $\theta =  25$ and 250 and with shorter dispersal distances, the forest density tends to decrease and eventually, it reaches zero, marking the absorbing phase transition reported for this type of model [@Nicoletti2023], meaning that in these cases the parameter $\theta$ was below the critical point $\theta_{ext}$ and produce the forest extinction (Figure S11). Increasing the dispersal distance produces higher forest density, while seasonality has the opposite effect. In the case of high dispersal and low $\theta$ and seasonality, we are again below $\theta_{ext}$. Note that forest density is the so-called active component of the model and represents the flammable forest.

![Total annual fire size vs. max fire cluster for the Fire model. **A** & **B** Are simulations with fixed $\theta$, where $\theta = p/f$, $p$ the forest recover probability and $f$ the ignition probability. **A** Are simulations with dispersal exponent $de=102$, mean dispersal distance of 1 (equivalent to nearest neighbours ) and **B** with $de=2.0155$, mean dispersal distance of 66 sites. **C** & **D** Are simulations with a fire season of 90 days where $\theta$ is divided by 10 (the probability of ignition $f$ is multiplied by 10), and the same $de$ as previously. ](figure/FireNL_TotSizeVsMaxSize_dispersal_theta_season.png)


### Fire Model Fitting

After the first ABC we obtained the first posterior distribution of parameters (Table S6). The model generated simulations that closely resemble the monthly MODIS fire estimates, despite being fit only using annual maxima (Figure S14). Repeated simulations with the same set of parameters revealed significant variation due to the stochastic nature of the model dynamics (Figure S14 & S15). A noticeable lag in the model's monthly maxima compared to MODIS data (Figures S14 & S15) may be due to the lack of a fire spread velocity parameter in the model. Despite this, when evaluating the total annual fire size, the model produced intervals that encompassed the MODIS estimates (Figure S16). Thus, the lag in the monthly maxima does not significantly impact our goal of predicting the total annual fire.

For the second ABC we used the posterior obtained in the first step, and calculated the power law exponent of the model simulations; this new set of parameters had a similar range as the first (Table S7), with simulated power law exponents near the observed value (Figure S17). The average $\theta$ of the final posterior distribution have a mean of 61 a range between  9 and 910, which is a low-intermediate range, considering the parameter range we used for the model exploration. 

When observing the predictions without temporal structure (Figure 3), the model simulated with the ignition probability $f$ calculated from the data, and $f$ estimated using the GAM model, yielded results consistent with the observed data range. The predicted total fire size showed a very good match with the data, while the predicted number of fires was slightly higher. The maximum fire size ($S_{max}$) was moderately higher, and the power-law exponent ($\alpha$) of the fire size distribution was lower (Figure 3). These results are interrelated because a lower $\alpha$ indicates larger fire events (Figure 3). The model exhibited an extended range with a few very large fires, which was expected due to the nonlinear nature of the model and the number of simulations (around 100 for each observed data).

![Predictions of the fire model compared with observed data for the years 2001-2020. We used best-fit parameters, the ignition probability from MODIS, and the ignition probability from the estimated GAM models (Simul GAM), and run 100 simulations of the model. To make them comparable we divided all the outputs (except power law exponent) by the total number of pixels in the region/model; black points are the medians.](figure/Amazon_ModelVsData_SimulGAM.png)


### Fire model predictions

The modelled temporal series, based on the $f$ from the GAM model for the 2001-2021 period, shows a wide 95th percentile interval that encompasses almost all the fire data (with the exception of the 2010 extreme fire). The median of the series suggests a decreasing trend in annual fires over this time period (Figure 4). This decrease, along with inter-annual fluctuations, is also apparent in the observational fire data shown in Figure 1. Specifically, the data indicate that the most extensive fires occurred in the first decade from 2001-2010, while the subsequent period from 2011-2021 experienced substantially less extensive burning. After 2021, the model utilizes General Circulation Model (GCM) predictions to estimate the fire ignition $f$. Under both RCP scenarios, a similar trend of increasing total annual fires is observed, but the annual maxima remain lower than the values observed in the 2001-2021 period.

<!--We observed that the $\theta$ for the best fitted parameter was in the lowest range if we consider the set of ten best fitted parameters (Table S7), so we decided to add simulations with other parameters from the set, but with the highest values of $\theta$. Then we performed the simulations with the first row ($\theta \sim 90$) and the sixth row ($\theta \sim 110$) of the parameters in table S7. The simulations by decade gave results that are similar between the two RCPs (Figure 5). The simulations with $\theta \sim 110$ resulted in higher values of total fire and maximum fire, a difference that was more accentuated after the 2040s. The range of the predictions was, in all cases, lower than the range of the observed data.--> 

![Time series of predictions of the fire model compared with observed data for the years 2001-2060. We used best-fit parameters distribution, the ignition probability from the estimated GAM models based on actual data up to 2021 and based on RCP 4.5, 8.5 afterwards. The points are the actual data, the line the median of simulations with 95% confidence interval bands. All the outputs are relative to the total area.](figure/Amazon_TotSize_year_theta61_RCP45-85.png)

The trends in the total annual vs maxima by decade fire plot (Figure 5) were consistent with the observations described above. The plot shows all the model simulations, demonstrating that the model is capable of simulating extreme fires, but the expected trend due to climate change scenarios is a decrease in extreme fires and an increase in median annual fire values. 

![Total annual size of fires vs maximum monthly fire size % relative to the area of the region. The data column was estimated using the MODIS burned area product. The predictions by decade were estimated with a fitted model using a monthly ignition probability calculated with data from General Circulation Models under two greenhouse gas emissions scenarios known as Representative Concentration Pathways (RCPs), RCP4.5 and RCP8.5. For the years 2001-2020 the ignition probability was estimated from actual data.](figure/Amazon_TotSizeVsMax_year_theta61_RCP45-85.png)


## Discussion 

Based on spatial forest-fire dynamics, the model fitted to actual data and the predictions up to 2060 suggest that the Amazon fire dynamics are outside an extreme critical regime and far from an absorbing phase transition. In addition, the model predicts a reduction of extreme anual fires that might be due to the double average that we used for the General Circulation Models (GCM): we averaged the tempertature over the spatial extension of the region and over all the 21 GCM. When we used the actual data ---also averaged over the region--- the model predicts in the range of observed extreme fires. So we hypothesize that increased temporal variability of the ignition probability could produce an increase in the extreme fires not captured by the model due to the smoothed nature of the CGM data. The increase in median tendency of the annual fires seems a more robust prediction, however, and is in line with the predicted increase in fire weather conditions for the area [@Abatzoglou2019].   

A critical regime would imply far more extreme fires and an absorbing phase transition could signal an imminent forest-savanna transition, without extreme fires but with more frequent fires. The actual and predicted fire regime seems to lie between these regimes.  This model does not explicitly includes deforestation or slash and burn and other agricultural areas---these are implicitly represented in the flammable forest state---and thus the continuous increase of these land uses could combine with the increase fires and produce drastic changes in the Amazonian region. In its present form, the model predictions represent the influence of climate change through temperature on fire dynamics.

<!-- Comparison with previous versions of the model forest fire model @Zinck2011 -->

Similar models have been used to fit fire data and determine if the system is in a critical regime. For example, Zinck et al. [@Zinck2011] found that some regions of Canada have experienced a change in the fire regime from a non-critical to critical. They argued that the original Drossel-Schwabl model (DSM) did not give the correct values of the power-law exponent of fire distributions, and thus modified the model to represent fire propagation as a stochastic birth-death process. This means modelling fire as a contact process [@Oborny2007] that develops over the forest sites; the same concept was further explored concerning the recent Australian mega-fires [@Nicoletti2023]. Here we took a different approach: as in the DSM in our model fire spread is deterministic, and we added what we think are the minimal processes needed for more realism: seasonality and forest dispersal distance. We agree with Zinck et al. [@Zinck2011] that an extension of the original DSM was needed to represent fire process observed in ecosystems, but also that not all complexity can or should be added; it is necessary to keep the model tractable in order to e.g. perform parameter-space exploration. Similar models including a deforested state with different ignition $f$ and recovery $p$ probabilties should be built and a rigorous comparison between these types of fire models would be needed to determine which mechanisms are most important to represent.

<!-- Comparison with other applications of the fire model @Palmieri2020 -->

Our model is phenomenological, in the sense that it does not include all mechanisms present at local scales but tries to predict fire dynamics at broad scales. One of the advantages of this kind of model is that it can be applied to different systems. This is the case of the original DSM model which has been applied to brain activity and rainfalls [@Palmieri2020]. In these two systems there are cycles of loading and discharge, a broad region where the fluctuations peak as the critical behaviour is established, and not a critical point with a very sharp transition as the theory of second order phase transitions suggests [@Stauffer1994]. The temporal dependence of the parameters imposed by the fire seasons, where during some months there is a higher ignition probability $f$, changes the control parameters with respect to the DMS model since, in fact, we do not observe a transition for a specific value of the $\theta$ parameter. Our results suggest that instead of having a specific fine-tuning to observe critical fire spread, a critical region similar to a "Griffiths phase" may be present in our model. Originally defined in statistical physics [@Moretti2013], a Griffiths phase represents an extended region in the parameter space characterized with power-laws scaling behaviour that arises from heterogeneity at local burning patterns. In our model, some areas may experience infrequent small fires as in the historical Amazon, while others see more active, irregular burning influenced by localized factors. However, we lack a rigorous result in this regard.

<!-- If there is an increase of fires following critical dynamics, there will be fires of all sizes and no reduction of pyrodiversity. This is against reduction of pyrodiversity you mention in the introduction -->

We observed the expected effect of the drought in 2010 on fires: the Amazon biome experienced the most extensive fires of the record, despite the deforestation rates being substantially lower than in the previous decade [@Aragao2018]. Other years of drought did not have the same effect, and the drought associated with the El Niño event in 2015-2016 produced a considerably lower number of fires than the 2010 drought. This difference could be explained by the nonlinear loading and discharge cycles that characterize the dynamics of fire-forest systems: after the fires and drought the fuel build up during the wetter years so the effects of an extreme could be different. It has been observed that deforestation as a cause of fires is becoming secondary, with droughts becoming primary producers of fires in the Amazon [@Aragao2018]. The good fit of our model, forced with the ignition probability estimated from actual data, supports that hypothesis. Our model incorporates the influence of drought using actual and predicted temperature to model the probability of ignition $f$. Using the inverse od the $p$ parameter the model also predicts that the forest will be recovered between 13 and 19 years, close to the 23 years suggested by Alencar [@Alencar2011].

<!--Besides, a longer fire season is thought to produce an increase in fires [@Brando2019], and our model showed that in the ranges of temperature predicted until 2060 over the two greenhouse gas emissions scenarios there is no evidence of a substantial increase in fire extension or maximum fire size. More frequent fires produce on average smaller fire events with a lower variability, and a low probability of mega-fires. -->


<!-- This signals the importance of using this kind of models to try to understand and predict at a broad scale the behaviour of the system. -->

The forest state in the model represents the flammable forest, as undisturbed tropical forest in the Amazon is thought to be not flammable and with a very low probability of natural fires [@Fonseca2019]. This is changing, however, due to the increased edges of undisturbed forest with human degraded forest and other land uses [@Aragao2018]. Fire is still produced by human activities [@Barlow2020] and starts from the transportation network and from the outside regions [@Brando2019]. These human-induced fires can invade standing forest and if climate change makes forests hotter and drier it will become more capable of sustaining more extensive fires [@Brando2019]. These changes are not considered in our model, and they would imply a higher density of our flammable forest state that could be represented by a lower $\theta$ than the estimated one, increasing the likelihood of an absorbing phase transition in which the forest has lost its capacity to recover from frequent fires and droughts [@Brando2019].

<!--Then our model assumes the fire conditions related to the actual deforestation and human activities are mostly invariants and predicts the modifications in fire regimes due to climate change scenarios. If the current fire regime had been in the critical region, the predicted changes would have been more important and the risk of collapse increased.-->  

<!-- Comparison with other predictions @Barlow2020 @Feng2021 @Amigo2020 -->

<!-- The fire predictions for the Amazon are in general different, for example @Brando2019 takes into account mainly the interaction between droughts and fires, and states that with continuous climate change fires will likely increase, provoking the conditions beyond which tropical forest are pushed into an alternative state. Increased flammability and longer fire season are expected to produce and increasing amount of fire. Our model incorporates the influence of drought indirectly using actual and predicted temperature to model $f$, but fire dynamics are opposed to that belief, in the ranges of temperature predicted until 2060 there no evidence of a substantial increase in fire extension or maximum fire size, even in the worst emission scenario. More frequent fires produce in average smaller fire events with a lower variability, and a low probability of mega-fires. -->

<!-- Forest recovery our predictions are from 13 to 19 years similar to the period suggested by Alencar 2011 = 23 years--> 

<!--Different authors have suggested that a deforestation of 20%-40% of the Amazon will produce a rapid transition to non-forest ecosystems [@Lovejoy2018;@Nobre2016]. Currently, approximately 20% of the forest since the 1960s has been lost, and environmental signals suggest that the system as a whole is oscillating [@Lovejoy2018]; dynamical analysis predicts that it is close to a transition [@Saravia2018a]. Our model predicts that the fire regime will not have an important variation due only to climatic change. Our main conclusion is that if deforestation and degradation of the Amazon forest tends to diminish, the Amazon will probably be resilient to predicted climatic change and the collapse of the Amazonian tropical forest towards a savannah will not be observed. -->

Several studies have suggested that a deforestation of 20% to 40% of the Amazon could lead to a rapid transformation into non-forest ecosystems [@Lovejoy2018; @Nobre2016]. Currently, approximately 20% of the Amazon's forest has been lost since the 1960s and environmental signals suggest that the system is undergoing fluctuations [@Lovejoy2018]. Dynamic analysis suggests that it is close to a transition point [@Saravia2018a]. However, our model predicts that the fire regime will not experience a significant change solely due to climate change. Our main conclusion is that if deforestation and degradation of the Amazon forest decrease, the region is likely to be resilient to predicted climate change, and the collapse of the Amazonian tropical forest into a savanna will not occur.

<!-- This extension in fire season would produce less large fires but as we approximate the critical extinction zone what happens is that the forest sites experience more frequent fires this could undermine the regeneration capacity of the forest pushing the model more towards the critical extinction, in nature this probably means that the system will be pushed to a drastic change in vegetation type as a transition from forest to savannah -->

<!-- Thus, predicting ‘black swan’ extreme fire events — which, by definition, have no historical precedent, such as the protracted, enormous and severe Australian 2019–2020 fires — seriously challenge the capacity of Earth-seystem-model projections. -->


## Acknowledgements

LAS is grateful to the Universidad Nacional de General Sarmiento for financial support (Project 30/1139), to the Agencia Nacional de Promoción Científica y Tecnológica (PICT 2020-SERIEA-02628) and Santiago R. Doyle for getting the computational resources used in this work.  

## Authors’ contributions

LAS, BBL, and SS conceived the ideas and designed methodology; LAS collected the data; LAS wrote the code; LAS, BBL and SS analysed the data; LAS led the writing of the manuscript. All authors contributed critically to the drafts and gave final approval for publication.

## Data Availability Statement

The source code and data are available at zenodo <https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.5703638> and Github <https://github.com/lsaravia/AmazonFireTippingPoints>.  Remote sensing MODIS data and climate data are available directly from NASA and Google Earth Engine. 


## References
